# Spack

!!! warning
    As noted below, the current Spack installation available through
    the module system is considered experimental, and its reliability may be
    decreased following the ARCHER2 upgrade that took place on 16 October 2025.
    If you wish to use Spack, rather than use the central installation you may
    prefer to take the in-development configuration files available at
    [GitHub](https://github.com/ARCHER2-HPC/archer2-spack) and adapt them for
    use in your own installation.

[Spack](https://github.com/spack/spack) is a package manager, a tool to assist
with building and installing software as well as determining what dependencies
are required and installing those. It was originally designed for use on HPC
systems, where several variations of a given package may be installed alongside
one another for different use cases -- for example different versions, built
with different compilers, using MPI or hybrid MPI+OpenMP. Spack is principally
written in Python but has a component written in Answer Set Programming (ASP)
which is used to determine the required dependencies for a given package
installation.

Users are welcome to install Spack themselves in their own directories, but we
are making an experimental installation tailored for ARCHER2 available
centrally. This page provides documentation on how to activate and install
packages using the central installation on ARCHER2. For more in-depth
information on using Spack itself please see the [developers'
documentation](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

!!! important
    As ARCHER2's central Spack installation is still in an
    experimental stage please be aware that we cannot guarantee that it will
    work with full functionality and we may not be able to provide support. The
    centrally-provided configuration and Spack-installed software may be subject
    to change.

## Activating Spack

As it is still in an experimental stage, the Spack module is not made available
to users by default. You must firstly load the `other-software` module:
    
    auser@ln01:~> module load other-software

Several modules with `spack` in their name will become visible to you. You
should load the `spack` module:

    auser@ln01:~> module load spack

This configures Spack to place its cache on and install software to a directory
called `.spack` in your base work directory, e.g. at
`/work/t01/t01/auser/.spack`.

At this point Spack is available to you via the `spack` command. You can get
started with `spack help`, reading the [Spack
documentation](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), or by testing a
package's installation.

## Using Spack on ARCHER2

### Installing software

At its simplest, Spack installs software with the `spack install` command:

    auser@ln01:~> spack install gromacs

This very simple `gromacs` installation specification, or spec, would install
GROMACS using the default options given by the Spack `gromacs` package. The spec
can be expanded to include which options you like. For example, the command

    auser@ln01:~> spack install gromacs@2024.2%gcc+mpi

would use the GCC compiler to install an MPI-enabled version of GROMACS version
2024.2.

!!! tip
    Spack needs to bootstrap the installation of some extra software in order to
    function, principally `clingo` which is used to solve the dependencies
    required for an installation. The first time you ask Spack to concretise a
    spec into a precise set of requirements, it will take extra time as it
    downloads this software and extracts it into a local directory for Spack's
    use.

You can find information about any Spack package and the options
available to use with the `spack info` command:

    auser@ln01:~> spack info gromacs

!!! tip
    The Spack developers also provide a website at
    [https://packages.spack.io/](https://packages.spack.io/) where you can
    search for and examine packages, including all information on options,
    versions and dependencies.

When installing a package, Spack will determine what dependencies are required
to support it. If they are not already available to Spack, either as packages
that it has installed beforehand or as external dependencies, then Spack will
also install those, marking them as implicity installed, as opposed to the
explicit installation of the package you requested. If you want to see the
dependencies of a package before you install it, you can use `spack spec` to see
the full concretised set of packages:

    auser@ln01:~> spack spec gromacs@2024.2%gcc+mpi

!!! tip
    Spack on ARCHER2 has been configured to use as much of the HPE Cray
    Programming Environment as possible. For example, this means that Cray
    LibSci will be used to provide the BLAS, LAPACK and ScaLAPACK dependencies
    and Cray MPICH will provide MPI. It is also configured to allow it to re-use
    as dependencies any packages that the ARCHER2 CSE team has `spack install`ed
    centrally, potentially helping to save you build time and storage quota.

### Using Spack packages

Spack provides a module-like way of making software that you have installed
available to use. If you have a GROMACS installation, you can make it
available to use with `spack load`:

    auser@ln01:~> spack load gromacs

At this point you should be able to use the software as normal. You can then
remove it once again from the environment with `spack unload`:

    auser@ln01:~> spack unload gromacs

If you have multiple variants of the same package installed, you can use the
spec to distinguish between them. You can always check what packages have been
installed using the `spack find` command. If no other arguments are given it
will simply list all installed packages, or you can give a package name to
narrow it down:

    auser@ln01:~> spack find gromacs

You can see your packages' install locations using `spack find --paths` or
`spack find -p`.

### Maintaining your Spack installations

In any Spack command that requires as an argument a reference to an installed
package, you can provide a hash reference to it rather than its spec. You can
see the first part of the hash by running `spack find -l`, or the full hash with
`spack find -L`. Then use the hash in a command by prefixing it with a forward
slash, e.g. `wjy5dus` becomes `/wjy5dus`.

If you have two packages installed which appear identical in `spack find` apart
from their hash, you can differentiate them with `spack diff`:

    auser@ln01:~> spack diff /wjy5dus /bleelvs

You can uninstall your packages with `spack uninstall`:

    auser@ln01:~> spack uninstall gromacs@2024.2

and of course, to be absolutely certain that you are uninstalling the correct
package, you can provide the hash:

    auser@ln01:~> spack uninstall /wjy5dus

Uninstalling a package will leave behind any implicitly installed packages that
were installed to support it. Spack may have also installed build-time
dependencies that aren't actually needed any more -- these are often packages
like `autoconf`, `cmake` and `m4`. You can run the garbage collection command to
uninstall any build dependencies and implicit dependencies that are no longer
required:

    auser@ln01:~> spack gc

If you commonly use a set of Spack packages together you may want to consider
using a Spack environment to assist you in their installation and management.
Please see the [Spack
documentation](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/environments.html) for
more information.

## Custom configuration

Spack is configured using YAML files. The central installation on ARCHER2 made
available to users is configured to use the HPE Cray Programming Environment and
to allow you to start installing software to your `/work` directories right
away, but if you wish to make any changes you can provide your own overriding
userspace configuration.

Your own configuration should fit in the user level scope. On ARCHER2 Spack is
configured to, by default, place and look for your configuration files in your
work directory at e.g. `/work/t01/t01/auser/.spack`. You can however override
this to have Spack use any directory you choose by setting the
`SPACK_USER_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable, for example:

    auser@ln01:~> export SPACK_USER_CONFIG_PATH=/work/t01/t01/auser/spack-config

Of course this will need to be a directory where you have write permissions,
such in your home or work directories, or in one of your project's `shared`
directories.

You can edit the configuration files directly in a text editor or by
running, for example:

    auser@ln01:~> spack config edit repos

which would open your `repos.yaml` in `vim`.

!!! tip
    If you would rather not use `vim`, you can change which editor is used by
    Spack by setting the `SPACK_EDITOR` environment variable.

The final configuration used by Spack is a compound of several scopes, from the
Spack defaults which are overridden by the ARCHER2 system configuration files,
which can then be overridden in turn by your own configurations. You can see
what options are in use at any point by running, for example:

    auser@ln01:~> spack config get config

which goes through any and all `config.yaml` files known to Spack and sets
the options according to those files' level of precedence. You can also get more
information on which files are responsible for which lines in the final active
configuration by running, for example to check `packages.yaml`:

    auser@ln01:~> spack config blame packages

Unless you have already written a `packages.yaml` of your own, this will show a
mix of options originating from the Spack defaults and also from an
`archer2-user` directory which is where we have told Spack how to use packages
from the HPE Cray Programming Environment.

If there is some behaviour in Spack that you want to change, looking at the
output of `spack config get` and `spack config blame` may help to show what you
would need to do. You can then write your own user scope configuration file to
set the behaviour you want, which will override the option as set by the
lower-level scopes.

Please see the [Spack
documentation](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/configuration.html) to
find out more about writing configuration files.

## Writing new packages

A Spack package is at its core a Python `package.py` file which provides
instructions to Spack on how to obtain source code and compile it. A very simple
package will allow it to build just one version with one compiler and one set of
options. A more fully-featured package will list more versions and include logic
to build them with different compilers and different options, and to also pick
its dependencies correctly according to what is chosen.

Spack provides several thousand packages in its `builtin` repository. You may be
able to use these with no issues on ARCHER2 by simply running `spack install` as
described above, but if you do run into problems in the interaction between
Spack and the CPE compilers and libraries then you may wish to write your own.
Where the ARCHER2 CSE service has encountered problems with packages we have
provided our own in a repository located at
`$SPACK_ROOT/var/spack/repos/archer2`.

### Creating your own package repository

A package repository is a directory containing a `repo.yaml` configuration file
and another directory called `packages`. Directories within the latter are named
for the package they provide, for example `cp2k`, and contain in turn a
`package.py`. You can create a repository from scratch with the command

    auser@ln01:~> spack repo create dirname

where `dirname` is the name of the directory holding the repository. This
command will create the directory in your current working directory, but you can
choose to instead provide a path to its location. You can then make the new
repository available to Spack by running:

    auser@ln01:~> spack repo add dirname

This adds the path to `dirname` to the `repos.yaml` file in your user scope
configuration directory [as described above](#custom-configuration). If your
`repos.yaml` doesn't yet exist, it will be created.

A Spack repository can similarly be removed from the config using:

    auser@ln01:~> spack repo rm dirname

### Namespaces and repository priority

A package can exist in several repositories. For example, the Quantum Espresso
package is provided by both the `builtin` repository provided with Spack and
also by the `archer2` repository; the latter has been patched to work on
ARCHER2.

To distinguish between these packages, each repository's packages exist within
that repository's namespace. By default the namespace is the same as the name of
the directory it was created in, but Spack does allow it to be different. Both
`builtin` and `archer2` use the same directory name and namespace.

!!! tip
    If you want your repository namespace to be different from the name of
    the directory, you can change it either by editing the repository's
    `repo.yaml` or by providing an extra argument to `spack repo create`:

        auser@ln01:~> spack repo create dirname namespace

Running `spack find -N` will return the list of installed packages with their
namespace. You'll see that they are then prefixed with the repository namespace,
for example `builtin.bison@3.8.2` and `archer2.quantum-espresso@7.2`. In order
to avoid ambiguity when managing package installation you can always prefix a
spec with a repository namespace.

If you don't include the repository in a spec, Spack will search in order all the
repositories it has been configured to use until it finds a matching
package, which it will then use. The earlier in the list of repositories, the
higher the priority. You can check this with:

    auser@ln01:~> spack repo list

If you run this without having added any repositories of your own, you will see
that the two available repositories are `archer2` and `builtin`, in this order.
This means that `archer2` has higher priority. Because of this, running `spack
install quantum-espresso` would install `archer2.quantum-espresso`, but you
could still choose to install from the other repository with `spack install
builtin.quantum-espresso`.

### Creating a package

Once you have a repository of your own in place, you can create new packages to
store within it. Spack has a `spack create` command which will do the initial
setup and create a boilerplate `package.py`. To create an empty package called
`packagename` you would run:

    auser@ln01:~> spack create --name packagename

However, it will very often be more efficient if you instead provide a download
URL for your software as the argument. For example, the Code_Saturne 8.0.3
source is obtained from
`https://www.code-saturne.org/releases/code_saturne-8.0.3.tar.gz`,
so you can run:

    auser@ln01:~> spack create https://www.code-saturne.org/releases/code_saturne-8.0.3.tar.gz

Spack will determine from this the package name, the download URLs for all
versions X.Y.Z matching the
`https://www.code-saturne.org/releases/code_saturne-X.Y.Z.tar.gz` pattern. It
will then ask you interactively which of these you want to use. Finally, it will
download the `.tar.gz` archives for those versions and calculate their
checksums, then place all this information in the initial version of the package
for you. This takes away a lot of the initial work!

At this point you can get to work on the package. You can edit an existing
package by running

    auser@ln01:~> spack edit packagename

or by directly opening `packagename/package.py` within the repository with a
text editor.

The boilerplate code will note several sections for you to fill out. If you did
provide a source code download URL, you'll also see listed the versions you
chose and their checksums.

A package is implemented as a Python class. You'll see that by default it will
inherit from the `AutotoolsPackage` class which defines how a package following
the common `configure` > `make` > `make install` process should be built. You
can change this to another build system, for example `CMakePackage`. If you
want, you can have the class inherit from several different types of build
system classes and choose between them at install time.

Options must be provided to the build. For an `AutotoolsPackage` package, you
can write a `configure_args` method which very simply returns a list of the
command line arguments you would give to `configure` if you were building the
code yourself. There is an identical `cmake_args` method for `CMakePackage`
packages.

Finally, you will need to provide your package's dependencies. In the main body
of your package class you should add calls to the `depends_on()` function. For
example, if your package needs MPI, add `depends_on("mpi")`. As the argument to
the function is a full Spack spec, you can provide any necessary versioning or
options, so, for example, if you need PETSc 3.18.0 or newer with Fortran support,
you can call `depends_on("petsc+fortran@3.18.0:")`.

If you know that you will only ever want to build a package one way, then
providing the build options and dependencies should be all that you need to do.
However, if you want to allow for different options as part of the install spec,
patch the source code or perform post-install fixes, or take more manual control
of the build process, it can become much more complex. Thankfully the Spack
developers have provided excellent documentation covering the whole process, and
there are many existing packages you can look at to see how it's done.

### Tips when writing packages for ARCHER2

Here are some useful pointers when writing packages for use with the HPE Cray
Programming Environment on ARCHER2.

#### Cray compiler wrappers

An important point of note is that Spack does not use the Cray compiler wrappers
`cc`, `CC` and `ftn` when compiling code. Instead, it uses the underlying
compilers themselves. Remember that the wrappers automate the use of Cray
LibSci, Cray FFTW, Cray HDF5 and Cray NetCDF. Without this being done for you,
you may need to take extra care to ensure that the options needed to use those
libraries are correctly set.

#### Using Cray LibSci

Cray LibSci provides optimised implementations of BLAS, BLACS, LAPACK and
ScaLAPACK on ARCHER2. These are bundled together into single libraries named for
variants on `libsci_cray.so`. Although Spack itself knows about LibSci, many
applications don't and it can sometimes be tricky to get them to use these
libraries when they are instead looking for `libblas.so` and the like.

The `configure` or `cmake` or equivalent step for your software will hopefully
allow you to manually point it to the correct library. For example,
Code_Saturne's `configure` can take the options `--with-blas-lib` and
`--with-blas-libs` which respectively tell it the location to search and the
libraries to use in order to build against BLAS.

Spack can provide the correct BLAS library search and link flags to be passed on
to `configure` via `self.spec["blas"].libs`, a
[`LibraryList`](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/llnl.util.html#llnl.util.filesystem.LibraryList)
object. So, the Code_Saturne package uses the following `configure_args()`
method:

```python
def configure_args(self):
    blas = self.spec["blas"].libs
    args = ["--with-blas-lib={0}".format(blas.search_flags),
            "--with-blas-libs={0}".format(blas.link_flags)]
    return args
```

Here the `blas.search_flags` attribute is resolved to a `-L` library search flag
using the path to the correct LibSci directory, taking into account whether the
libraries for the Cray, GCC or AOCC compilers should be used. `blas.link_flags`
similarly gives a `-l` flag for the correct LibSci library. Depending on what
you need, the `LibraryList` has other attributes which can help you pass the
options needed to get `configure` to find and use the correct library.

## Contributing

If you develop a package for use on ARCHER2 please do consider opening a pull
request to the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/ARCHER2-HPC/archer2-spack).
