# MITgcm

!!! warning
    The ARCHER2 Service is not yet available. This documentation is in
    development.

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology General Circulation Model
(MITgcm) is a numerical model designed for study of the atmosphere,
ocean, and climate. MITgcm's flexible non-hydrostatic formulation
enables it to simulate fluid phenomena over a wide range of scales; its
adjoint capabilities enable it to be applied to sensitivity questions
and to parameter and state estimation problems. By employing fluid
equation isomorphisms, a single dynamical kernel can be used to simulate
flow of both the atmosphere and ocean.

## Useful Links

  - MITgcm home page <http://mitgcm.org>
  - MITgcm documentation <https://mitgcm.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>

## Building MITgcm on ARCHER2

MITgcm is not available via a module on ARCHER2 as users will build
their own executables specific to the problem they are working on.
However, we do provide an optfile which will allow genmake2 to create
Makefiles which will work on ARCHER2.

You can obtain the MITgcm source code from the developers by cloning
from the GitHub repository with the command

    git clone https://github.com/MITgcm/MITgcm.git

You should then copy the ARCHER2 optfile into the MITgcm
    directories:

    cp /work/y07/shared/mitgcm/optfile/linux_amd64_gfortran_archer2 MITgcm/tools/build_options/

When you are building your code with this optfile, use the GNU
environment with

    module restore PrgEnv-gnu

You should also set the following environment variables.
`MITGCM_ROOTDIR` is used to locate the source code and should point to
the top MITgcm directory. Optionally, adding the MITgcm tools directory
to your `PATH` environment variable makes it easier to use tools such as
genmake2, and the `MITGCM_OPT` environment variable makes it easier to
refer to pass the optfile to genmake2.

    export MITGCM_ROOTDIR=/path/to/MITgcm
    export PATH=$MITGCM_ROOTDIR/tools:$PATH
    export MITGCM_OPT=$MITGCM_ROOTDIR/tools/build_options/linux_amd64_gfortran_archer2

When using genmake2 to create the Makefile, you will need to specify the
optfile to use. Other commonly used options might be to use extra source
code with the `-mods` option, and to enable MPI with `-mpi`. You might
then run a command that resembles the following:

    genmake2 -mods /path/to/additional/source -mpi -optfile $MITGCM_OPT

You can read about the full set of options available to genmake2 by
running

    genmake2 -help

Finally, you may then build your executable with the `make depend`,
`make` commands.

## Running MITgcm on ARCHER2

Once you have built your executable you can write a script like the
following which will allow it to run on the ARCHER2 compute nodes. This
example would run a pure MPI MITgcm simulation over 2 nodes of 128 cores
each for up to one hour.

    #!/bin/bash
    
    # Slurm job options (job-name, compute nodes, job time)
    #SBATCH --job-name=MITgcm-simulation
    #SBATCH --time=1:0:0
    #SBATCH --nodes=2
    #SBATCH --tasks-per-node=128
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1
    
    # Replace [budget code] below with your project code (e.g. t01)
    #SBATCH --account=[budget code] 
    #SBATCH --partition=standard
    #SBATCH --qos=standard
    
    # Setup the job environment (this module needs to be loaded before any other modules)
    module load epcc-job-env
    
    # Set the number of threads to 1
    #   This prevents any threaded system libraries from automatically
    #   using threading.
    export OMP_NUM_THREADS=1
    
    # Launch the parallel job
    #   Using 256 MPI processes and 128 MPI processes per node
    #   srun picks up the distribution from the sbatch options
    srun --cpu-bind=cores ./mitgcmuv
